INTRODUCTION
	WELCOME
	WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. OVERVIEW OF BLOCKCHAIN BASICS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	BLOCKCHAIN OVERVIEW
	BLOCKCHAIN: THE BASICS
	BLOCKCHAIN: BEYOND THE BASICS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. HOW DOES BLOCKCHAIN WORK?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	WHAT ARE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE KEYS?
	INTRODUCING NONCES, HASH FUNCTIONS, AND MINING
	THE IMMUTABLE DISTRIBUTED LEDGER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. HOW BLOCKCHAIN ENABLES BITCOIN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	THE BIRTH OF BITCOIN
	HOW BITCOIN IS CREATED AND MANAGED
	FINANCIAL SERVICES AND BLOCKCHAIN
	ALTCOINS, ALTCHAINS, AND ICOS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. THE WIDER BLOCKCHAIN UNIVERSE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	BLOCKCHAIN IN PRACTICE: HYPERLEDGER AND RIPPLE
	USING ETHEREUM TO WRITE SMART CONTRACTS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. IMPLEMENTING BLOCKCHAIN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	THE ENERGY SECTOR AND BLOCKCHAIN
	IDENTITY MANAGEMENT AND BLOCKCHAIN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. RISKS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	THE RISKS OF BLOCKCHAIN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONCLUSION
	NEXT STEPS


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	WELCOME
	- Blockchain, the backend database technology that makes Bitcoin work
	- Beyond cryptocurrency, it`s redefining how we store, update, and move data across networks. 
	- It`s enabling a completely new way to write and deploy applications. 
	- It has the potential to improve online security and trust. 
	- It may even enable the creation of a new type of organization that is without hierarchy and centralized decision making. 
	
	WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. OVERVIEW OF BLOCKCHAIN BASICS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	BLOCKCHAIN OVERVIEW
	- There`s a new technology to store and manage data across the internet and other computing networks, it`s called "BLOCKCHAIN" or "DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGY", DLT, and it was created as a result of the introduction of the Bitcoin cryptocurrency. 
	- It can help solve some difficult computing challenges around security and it introduces capabilities that are "disruptive" to the status quo. For example, Bitcoin effectively eliminates the need for banks and a whole host of financial middle men, that`s disruptive. 
	- Blockchain technology can be used as a foundation for a new generation of software that distributes code and enables transactions between individuals and machines without the need for complex server infrastructure. 
	- It`s a peer-to-peer network architecture meaning that a"ll participants are equal in their role on the network" and its topology is "FLAT", in other words, unlike for example a client`s server, it is "WITHOUT HIERARCHY". 
	- Blockchain will enable new computing platforms that ride on top of it too, such as Ethereum, Rootstock, and Tezos. 

	BLOCKCHAIN: THE BASICS
	- "Internet has decimated" industries like the newspaper business, reinvented others, like how we manage our money, "and created" new industries such as social media, but this vast network of networks has some stubborn problems. 
	- TRUST ISSUES
	  We face ongoing questions such as, is the person you are doing business with online really who they say they are? Is a service real?	And are only authorized people being granted access to private systems. 
	  Our systems and data bases are compromised, made unavailable, money and identities are stolen, and our confidence to further innovate using the Internet is stifled(suffocate) and at worst impeded(hindered). 
	  If we want ironclad online voting, workable digital currencies, confidence in machines talking to machines, self-driving cars that securely negotiate with each other, improved methods to authenticate identity, and more, we`re going to need a more secure and trustworthy Internet. It`s going to need to begin with how we manage data and databases. 
	- TRADITIONAL DATABASE
	  A core characteristic of a traditional database is that it has essential authority that governs it. 
	  First, with one master database with one major keyholder for each organizational need this can result in a "single point of failure".
	  The second major flaw is that "all power is held by the central authority". Now in general, this is okay. For example, if you run an e-commerce website you probably want total control over it. Your own central authority, perhaps you as CEO, decides all aspects of that environment, including shutting it down. What central power can do, however, is exert authority that is subject to bias, such as limiting access for subjective reasons. When databases power important and influential systems in the private and public sector rights to access becomes a complex topic. 
	  In most cases, "people remain the final arbiter of the validity of a transaction". We see this in contract work. A contract between two entities completed over the Internet still requires one or more central authorities to validate data. For example, with a mortgage banks must validate savings and approve loans. Title companies must validate properties and legal professionals must validate signatures and other contractual requirements. Each one of these central authorities has unique power that levies considerable overhead in a mortgage transaction. "The transactions in the varied databases all take time to process, cost money, are vulnerable to hacking, provide limited participation from those involved, requires special skills and can be error prone". Up until now we`ve generally been okay with this. 
	  - THE BLOCKCHAIN
	  The blockchain, however, solves almost all of these challenges. 
	  Instead of one single database residing on a single server in a data center, a blockchain database is installed on individual computers used by the people who used the database. In fact, the identical database is installed in every computer of every user who uses that database. We call it a "distributed database" because of this. 
	  Now, in order to create a new entry in this distributed database all participating computers must agree to the change. "CONSENSUS" must be reached. For example, if we use the metaphor of payment, if a person attempts to make a payment from one user to another and does not have sufficient funds in their account the blockchain participants will not permit the transaction. 
	  In addition, there are participants in the network called "MINERS" who contribute processing power to the network to solve mathematical problems in exchange for a reward. That is used to ensure that only valid new transactions may be added to the database.



	BLOCKCHAIN: BEYOND THE BASICS
	- Blockchain technology compelling beacause :
		a new way to manage databases
		support trust
		it creates new opportunity. 
	- CHALLENGES OF PROVING OWNERSHIP OF A DIGITAL PRODUCT
	  While digital products such as photos or music have become simple to acquire, store, and move across devices, the same advantage makes it really easy to copy them, and dare I say it, steal them. Artists and media organizations have had to largely accept this fate, resulting in the loss of billions of dollars of lost value. Even if you are a valid owner, it`s hard to prove. 
	- IMMUTABLE PROOF USING BLOCKCHAIN
	  If we could register our creation and ownership of digital products in a blockchain database, it`s possible we could attain immutable proof. For example, if you are a professional photographer and you register your photographs on a blockchain, it will be difficult for someone else to claim that they took the picture. Your ownership record will be stored on the blockchain and it will be nearly impossible to change that fact. The blockchain would also enable a more trustworthy mechanism to support transfer of digital ownership. 
	- SHORT-TERM CHALLENGES
	  Blockchain technology is still a work-in-progress. It`s open-source and is evolving as we speak. For this reason, it has some significant short-term challenges, including "transaction speed, verification, data management, a lot of data is generated and needs to be stored on the blockchain, and despite a promise of high security, there are still security and privacy challenges". We`ll also need to overcome the "complexities of integration". 
	- SOLUTIONS
	  If blockchain is going to co-exist with other technologies, which I suggest will be necessary, a lot of "innovation" is still needed to make that happen. Integration will also require a way for different distributed ledgers to talk to each other. We`ll need a "set of standards", that is, uniform engineering or technical criteria, methods, processing of practices, a must for any global adoption of a new technology. We don`t yet have them for the blockchain, but fortunately, work is underway. 
	- Bitcoin, the digital currency, both the reason blockchain exists and the biggest current utilizer of it, means that it is financial organizations who are on the front lines of its near-term impact.
	- Already we see the emergence of interesting new ideas and blockchain partners, such as RIPPLE and the INTERLEDGER PROTOCOL, ready to enhance and improve existing payment systems.


	QUIZ
	  Blockchain is to Bitcoin as the Internet is to FTP
	  \transactions are only added and removed by consensus that`s right -- transactions are immutable, they are "NEVER REMOVED".
	  Immutability is a distinct advantage of a blockchain database because the history of every transaction is available for inspection.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. HOW DOES BLOCKCHAIN WORK?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	WHAT ARE PUBLIC AND PRIVATE KEYS?
	- The connection is that public and private keys are one way to enable cryptography.
	- One of the many forms of cryptography is called the "Public Key Infrastructure" or PKI. It involves two keys, a public key and a private key. Everyone can see the public key, but only you have the private key and it must be kept secret. Imagine that you have a locked mailbox. The public key is the address of the mailbox. A person can insert money or a message into that mailbox but cannot retrieve it. The only way to retrieve the contents is to use your private key. 
	- PROCESS
	   CONFIDENTIALITY
	   The first step is to have your private key generated. There`s a lot of software to do this as a private key is basically a random mix of the letters A through F and some numbers. You can try it yourself at bitaddress.org. Here is an example of a digital private key. When a private key is generated, its pair is also created. That`s the public key and it`s created using a complex algorithmic process. The process makes it possible to generate the public key from the private key but makes it exceptionally difficult to figure out the private key from the public key. In other words, it`s basically one directional in creation. Now, how do we use this? Whenever you want someone to send you something secret, you first send them your public key. The other person locks the message with your public key and then sends the message to you. You then open the message with your private key. Someone who tries to intercept the message will be unable to unlock the message. Only you can because you keep your private key and never share it with anyone. We`ll discuss later that your keys are stored in what is called a wallet on your computer or smartphone. So, we`ve seen how PKI enables cryptography. 
	   AUTHENTICITY
	   Specifically, if you send a message to someone else, how can they know that it was sent by you for sure? For this we`ll use a " digital signature". A long time ago, documents were sent in envelopes that were often sealed with wax with a unique stamp in the wax. This way, the receiver knew that the envelope came from a trusted source and that it had not been tampered with on its journey. A digital signature is the digital version of the wax seal. Digital signatures use public/private key pairs to function. When sending an electronic message, the message is signed with a private key. When the message is received and the recipient has your public key, it verifies that the signature was created with the private key pair of the sender. This PKI-based digital signature authenticates that the sender is who they say they are. If someone attempted to bluff ping you by using another private key, the recipient using your public key would immediately know it was not from you because the public key would not authenticate the private key of the sender. Simple but powerful. 
	   The public/private key pair infrastructure I`ve just described is essential to understanding how block chain technology works. It is the way that all the transactions in a block chain database are authenticated.

	
	INTRODUCING NONCES, HASH FUNCTIONS, AND MINING
	- NONCE
	  A nonce is a number that is used once, that is, it`s used for a specific purpose and never used again. One such use is in digital transmissions to reduce duplicate transactions where that could have negative consequences. In an era of big data, there`s always a possibility that data entered into a database may have the same identifier. Adding a nonce to some identifier makes it additionally unique, thus making it harder for accidental duplication. This is essential to how transactions are approved for adding to a blockchain database that we`ll see soon. 
	
	- HASH FUNCTION
	  A hash function is a mathematical process that takes data of any size, performs an operation on it, and returns a hash, which is data of a fixed-size. Whether it is a single letter or a Shakespearian soliloquy, the resulting hash is the same size. 
	  "Hashing" - Converting a string to a signature is called hashing. 
	  Hashing only goes in "one direction". Therefore a good candidate for a encryptionku. 
	  "Fixed-length output"
	  Remember, a hash function will take any length string and create a fixed-length output, but you can`t take the fixed-length data output and recreate the string. One use of hashing is to "keep a database small" For example, let`s say you wanted to have a reference database proving ownership of high-quality photos. You could hash the photo, that is, take its digital properties, including other details such as time it was taken, who took it, and where it was taken and create a hash output. Only the light-weight digital footprint of the hash needs to be stored in the database since the hash is mathematically associated with the original picture and data. 
	  "Unique identifier"
	  A hash with 64 characters of numbers and letters creates an astronomical number of combinations and there`s little chance of duplication. In the blockchain, hashes are used as identifiers for blocks, transactions, and addresses. The hashing algorithm used in the blockchain is called "SHA-256". SHA, which stands for Secure Hash Algorithm, generates an almost unique fixed-size 256-bit hash. 
	- MINING
	  Let`s think of mining in a traditional context. Whether it is mining for coal, gold, or oil, we could all agree it requires a significant amount of resources in terms of money, equipment, people, and time. In the case of gold, if mining it were easy, gold wouldn`t have much value. The truth is the opposite, gold is hard to discover, mine, and process, and therefore, it has significant value. Now, let`s bring mining into a computing context. A person, or more specifically a computer, that performs mining for some reward must expend some processing power and in turn, consume electricity to harvest the result. The more valuable the result is, it`s fair to conclude, the more processing and power that is required. What would make computers work hard at solving really difficult mathematical problems? Okay, get ready for this. We`re going to bring back the nonce and the hashing function to create a difficult math problem for a computer to solve. We`ll begin with a string. We`re going to use Hello, World. We then apply SHA-256 and we get a fixed output. 
	  DIFFICULT MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM EXAMPLE :
	  	Let`s say we wanted to force the signature of Hello, World to begin with a desired set of numbers or letters. We`ll say we want the hash to begin with four zeros. For this, we`ll introduce a nonce into the hashing function. For the first nonce, remember, it`s a single-use number, we`ll choose one. When the hashing function runs again, the output will be different because a nonce of one was introduced. If it didn`t result in a hash beginning with four zeros, we`ll need to change the nonce to another number and run the hash function again. As you can imagine, this may take some time if I keep thinking up nonce numbers and running the hash function. What we really need is for a computer to choose you numbers and run the hash function until it reaches a hash that begins with four zeros. This is work that computers are really good at. In fact, in this instance, we have a name for it, we call it mining. 
	  A computer is going to solve this mathematical problem by applying its processing capability. The harder it gets to solve the problem, the more computing power, and thus, electrical power, is required. When the solution is attained, the computer that solves it, assuming many are trying to do it at the same time, should get a reward. That`s exactly what we`ll see a little later when we discover how cryptocurrency works. Finally, the act of mining and successfully creating a winning hash will also provide another important feature, "proof of work". 
	

	THE IMMUTABLE DISTRIBUTED LEDGER
	- A blockchain is a database, but it`s unlike most databases that have come before it in that it has two specific core qualities that make it unique and powerful. It`s a "distributed database" and its "entries are immutable". In other words, it doesn`t sit on one all powerful server and the "data stored in it cannot be deleted or edited." 
	In a traditional structured database, data is stored in columns and rows in multiple tables. Usually a table stores related data. For example, a table might contain a person`s name and address. It will also contain a unique key called a primary key for each row that can be used to connect one table to another. In a billing system for example, another table might contain invoice information for a purchase. The address of the buyer will likely be referenced via a primary key. Databases have become very sophisticated and can have complex logic built into them. In a client/server architecture, the database lives on a single logical server. Data is queried from the client presented as a request to the server which then runs the query and produces a result for the client. In web-based architectures, there are often at least three tiers, the web client, the web server, and the database. Much like client/server, both the web server and database server are centralized. Often workload is distributed among many physical servers. In this way, they can be said to be distributed, but logically they are governed by central rules. This physical distribution design helps with redundancy and increased performance. As a result of social media and massive disparate data sources, databases are increasingly unstructured. While techniques such as natural language processing and text analytics help to manage the data, the overall physical database architecture is largely the same. Somewhere in the environment is a set of rules on who can use the database and what rights each user has. It served the world well and continues to be the dominant model for data management. What makes this database architecture useful and powerful also makes it vulnerable. Anyone with the right credentials can access and there are too many ways to hack the system as many high-profile cases have demonstrated over the past few years. Massive credit card thefts from well-known retailers have all been too common. 
	A blockchain database is "structured" in the sense that it contains specific blocks of data organized in a particular way. 
	However, there is a big difference in how the database is "hosted". 
	"UNLIKE IN A TRADITIONAL DATABASE ENVIRONMENT, A COPY OF THE BLOCKCHAIN DATABASE RESIDES ON EVERY COMPUTER THAT PARTICIPATES IN A GIVEN BLOCKCHAIN." 
		For example, all Bitcoin users will have a full copy of the Bitcoin blockchain database on their computing device. There is no central server. It is "not hierarchical". In fact, we call it "peer to peer since the architecture is flat". 
		STEP 1 - In a simplified description, when a person first joins a blockchain-based environment, the full database is downloaded to their device. 
		STEP 2 - Next, as each transaction takes place in the blockchain, say Bitcoin currency is sent from one person to another, each transaction is recorded in every instance of the blockchain database. In this way, it is said to be a distributed database. In fact, there is an industry preference to refer to the database as a "Distributed Ledger or DLT, Distributed Ledger Technology".
		STEP 3 - Unlike a traditional database, for a transaction to be processed and inserted into the blockchain ledger, "consensus" must be reached by all participating devices. 
		STEP 4 - In addition, "minors" who we discussed earlier "create the necessary hash signatures that allow new blocks to be appended to the database". Since minors conduct significant work in terms of processing power and electricity, their successful effort in finding the NNS that created the winning hash, called "proof of work", PROVIDES INTEGRITY because we don`t want it to be too easy to add blocks. Without proof of work, adding blocks to the block chain would be too easy and could make it vulnerable to robust hacking attempts. 
	- Finally, "a blockchain distributed ledger is IMMUTABLE". This means that "ENTRIES MADE CAN NEVER BE EDITED OR DELETED". That`s really different from a traditional database. It also means that once a transaction takes place, there is no recourse. If a mistake is made, it`s permanent. For example, if you make the wrong payment amount or send money to the wrong person, assuming it`s a valid transaction, it cannot be reversed. Outside of the good nature of the person with whom the mistake was made to return the money or correct the amount, you`re out of luck. When we dive even a little deeper, particularly when we discuss Bitcoin and Ethereum, we`ll see that these design choices for the blockchain make a lot of sense.


	QUIZ
	A private key is never used by anyone else but you.
	SHA-256 : It stands for Secure Hash Algorithm and is 256-bits.
	Every distributed ledger participant has a full version of the database with most attributes in clear text.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. HOW BLOCKCHAIN ENABLES BITCOIN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	THE BIRTH OF BITCOIN
	- The first notion of Bitcoin was a paper published in November 2008 on a cryptography mailing list. The paper authored by Satoshi Nakamoto was titled "A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System". As of 2017 we still don`t know who Satoshi is. It may even be a pseudonym for a group of people. It is believed that the paper and its proposal was a response to the financial crisis of the late 2000s, exceptionally bad loan practices, dubious financial schemes, and a brittle banking system created enormous havoc across national economies. Confidence was shattered. Bitcoin offered the opportunity to have a trustless monetary system and one in which banks and other financial intermediaries became unnecessary. After all, the status quo had failed so many and it was believed an alternative would be welcomed. The term trustless can seem a little confusing because it suggests that we can`t trust it. Let me explain. The existing financial markets rely heavily on a system of trust. For example, you deposit money in a bank and you expect and trust the bank to manage it for you. That reliance on trust has inherent risk. We saw that loud and clear in the late 2000s during the Great Recession banking crisis. Therefore, if we build a system that does not rely on trust, which we`ll call trustless, then we can reduce the risk. "INSTEAD THE SYSTEM SHOULD FUNCTION ON A SET OF UNALTERABLE DIGITAL RULES." In January 2009, only a few months after the paper was published, a first release of the proposed Bitcoin open source software appeared. Instead of software owned by someone, being open source allowed anyone to inspect, modify and enhance the software. From day one the software enabled a creation of a completely digital currency absent of any intermediaries or governing authority and with no physical coins or notes. Fundamentally it enabled anyone to send and receive money directly with anyone else. This notion is profoundly disruptive because it counters every contemporary concept we have of how money works. For one thing, how can a digital unit created from nothing possibly have value. For something to have value as payment, typically it must be scarce and it must be accepted by others for payment. Gold, silver, diamonds, and oil for example all derive their value from being both scarce and expensive to mine. Most modern money originally derived value from being underpinned by the price of gold. In the 20th century with popular currencies well established such as the dollar and pound, and for other reasons beyond the scope of this course, the gold connection was abandoned and they became fiat currencies. Those enforced and supported by governments. A digital currency cannot be born as a fiat currency because there is no supporting organization. It must be initially underpinned by some scarce resource.
		" THAT SCARCE RESOURCE FOR BITCOIN IS THE PROCESS OF RUNNING A HASH ALGORITHM TO ARRIVE AT A PREDETERMINED DATA OUTPUT AS DISCUSSED PREVIOUSLY." 
		This requires increasing amount of processing power and electricity. 
		After that the currency can be freely exchanged and its value can fluctuate based on supply and demand just like regular currencies.


	HOW BITCOIN IS CREATED AND MANAGED
	- With bitcoin, there are two core function or roles. 
	  1. One role is a person who simply buys and sells existing bitcoin using their own dollars or a local equivalent with the intent to use Bitcoin as currency. 
	  2. The other role is a person who wants to earn new Bitcoins for being a MINER.

	  If you`ve decided to buy some bitcoin, you`ll need a service that will give you bitcoin in exchange for your currency. There are several of these, including Coinbase and Kraken. You typically buy bitcoin with a credit card. The value of the bitcoin is determined by market price at the time of purchase. If you`re using dollars, the exchange rate will be how much bitcoin you will get for one dollar. Once you buy the currency, it can be registered as yours at the vendor, or you can choose to move it to a bitcoin wallet on your own personal device like a smartphone or PC. You`ll also recall that this wallet contains your public and private keys. At this point, you can now use bitcoin. You are effectively now part of the bitcoin network of users, the bitcoin blockchain. What is the underlying process that happens when you send bitcoin to somebody. First, the recipient needs a mechanism to receive the money. That means they also need to be part of the bitcoin blockchain. Everyone on this network has an address. When you want to send money, you specify the address.
	  " The address is typically derived by a hash of a person`s public key." 
	  Let`s say Alice wants to send 10 btc to Bob. The btc is the bitcoin currency designation, just like dollars or euros. Alice uses her bitcoin wallet to initiate the transfer of 10 bitcoin. Of course, she must have that amount available. She specifies Bob`s address as the destination. A small processing fee is added to the 10 bitcoin. It`s relatively negligible, but will be used later to pay miners. The transaction is distributed across the blockchain network, every computer that is on the bitcoin blockchain, and it is queued up to be processed. 

	  The processing of bitcoin transactions takes approximately 10 minutes. What`s involved in this processing? 
	  To add Alice`s 10 bitcoin to Bob`s account requires two transactions in the blockchain ledger, adding two blocks. 
	  	1. That is Alice`s will have 10 bitcoin less, 
	  	2. While Bob`s will have 10 bitcoin more.
	  There`s no such thing as a personal account on the bitcoin block chain. A person`s account is simply calculated by tallying older transactions, all the additions and deletions of bitcoin in the entire blockchain and deriving a total. 
	  Tracing blocks back to individuals is maintained through the public private key architecture discussed earlier. If the owner of a public key is known, then it`s possible to associate them with the transactions that were created with that particular key. Also, should a person lose their private key, they lose access to any bitcoins associated with it. It`s these keys that represent the crypto in cryptocurrency. 

	  Now blocks don`t automatically get added every 10 minutes, a block is added only when two conditions are met. 
	  	1. Number one, there must be "consensus" by all the distributed databases that the transaction is legit. For example, Alice must have 10 bitcoin and Bob must be able to receive it. 
	  	2. The second condition is that a "miner on the network succeeds in resolving to a specific hash output based on a specific input". This results is what we call "proof of work", and it ensures that blocks cannot be added without significant rigor. It also solves the big problem of ensuring that people do not spend the same amount of money twice or more during the processing window. Since it takes about 10 minutes for a winner to emerge from many miners trying to solve a given hash and generate proof of work, no blocks will be accepted as authentic, until that work is complete. For their part, miners are rewarded for their effort with new bitcoin. Every new block added is dependent on the prior block. So trying to insert a block, edit one, or delete prior blocks becomes almost impossible. They are dependents because each new block`s address is a hash of the previous one. If someone tries to change a previous block, thus changing the hash,the subsequent block would screen foul and it would not be permitted. 
		Once all the criteria are met, confirmed, and approved, the blocks are now added to the chain, and the transaction is complete, irreversible, and immutable. 

	  	Let`s look more deeply at the role of the miner. "THE MINER`S ROLE IS TO PROVIDE PROOF OF WORK BY COMPLETING THE MATH PROBLEM AND THUS GIVE PERMISSION FOR A BITCOIN BLOCK TO BE ADDED TO THE BLOCK CHAIN." Miners do this because they can earn money. Miners compete to solve every problem that is required for each block transaction, and the winning miner is provided with a specific amount of new bitcoin and the transaction fee. They are creating this new currency one transaction at a time. Once a miner gets bitcoin, they can keep it or exchange it for local currency. Why doesn`t everyone become a miner? Because lots of computing power is required. Miners typically have banks and banks of computing processors. It`s expensive and complex to manage. 








	FINANCIAL SERVICES AND BLOCKCHAIN
		1- "FINANCIAL INDUSTRY IMPACT"
		Let`s go deeper in exploring the financial industry impact of distributed ledger technology. According to Alex and Don Tapscott in Harvard Business Review, our global financial system moves trillions of dollars a day and serves billions of people. But the system is rife with problems, adding costs through fees and delays, creating friction through redundant and onerous paperwork, and opening up opportunities for fraud and crime. So how might distributed ledger technology help to fix these problems? It will be easy for members of the financial industry like banks, stock traders, lending agencies, mortgage brokers, and others to ignore cryptocurrencies as a passing fad. They could push back in it knowing that cryptocurrencies have the potential to disrupt their business models, reduce costs and therefore revenues, and create enormous risk. But they would be wrong to do that. They know this now, and most are taking the topic seriously. For most of them, there is a recognition that blockchain technology could represent a market restructure. In fact, some are enthusiastically embracing distributed ledger technology despite the fact that many jobs could be lost, entire financial sub-industries could be redesigned or eliminated, and physical financial centers could hollow out. The disruption that a new technology can bring to an industry isn`t new. We only have to look at the impact of online media on newspapers, or e-commerce to brick and mortar retail. What we don`t yet know is to what degree new opportunities will be created, new jobs will emerge, and what societal benefits may be enjoyed. Amazon.com is creating hundreds of thousands of new jobs, and Facebook has enabled millions of small businesses to emerge. Perhaps blockchain technology will create new financial products and services, new job categories and skills, higher-quality consumer experiences, and reduce fraud and risk. In fact, a low barrier to entry could enable more people across the globe, particularly in developing areas, to participate in financial markets both as consumers and producers. Seamless electronic payment and receipt systems, easily available on all types of mobile devices, already enable e-commerce in undeveloped rural parts of the world. Examples include WeChat in China, Zoto in Nigeria, and YellowPepper in Latin America. Blockchain may amplify and extend these benefits. 

		A product called "Ripple is reducing the time to send financial transactions cross-border". The qualities of a distributed ledger that enable this are a reduction of intermediaries, trustless connections between entities, and a secure and immutable record of all transactions. 
		For financial services, creating a network of trust between a vast collection of disparate entities that doesn`t require the enormous overhead of today`s checks and balances is groundbreaking. Together, these constitute remarkable efficiencies. Many financial services leaders cite efficiency as the top benefit. 
		
		2- "MORTGAGE INDUSTRY"
		Let`s take a look at blockchain in the mortgage industry. 
			According to the big four consulting firm PWC, every stage of the mortgage process could be improved by distributed ledger technology. 
			1. At origination, blockchain might help establish more "accurate recordkeeping". 
			2. At fulfillment, it could provide "immutable proof" that loan estimates were sent within three business days. 
			3. Smart contracts would "speed up settlement" flows. 
			4. In the mortgage servicing process, blockchain could "track the movement of payments", and 
			5. In the secondary markets, it might provide" transparency about the ownership" of underlying assets. 

			Better processes can help all stakeholders. 
			1. Borrowers could see" lower closing costs". Mortgage intermediaries can cost between one to two percent of a property`s value. As we`ve seen, blockchain can "eliminate intermediaries". 
			2. Better record-keeping could address fraud, a major challenge across the financial sector. The accuracy of loan information is essential. 
			3. Maintaining high integrity in the flow of data across disparate networks can help servicers. For example, mortgage servicing rights, MSRs, could be transferred over blockchain. MSRs refer to a contractual agreement where the rights to service an existing mortgage are sold by the original lender to another party who specializes in the various functions of servicing mortgages. Efficiencies and MSRs could enable benefits such as moving impaired loans to specialty services more quickly. 
			So far, I`ve been saying that all these things might be possible. But who`s actually using blockchain technology for mortgages?
			"FACTOM", an Austin-based blockchain service company, has launched a product called Factom Harmony that`s aimed at the mortgage industry. It uses blockchain technology to ensure that mortgage companies and their clients have complied with regulations, documents are securely preserved, and everything is easily accessible in the event of an audit. 

		3- "HOME LOANS"
			"Bank of China has a property valuation system" for "HOME LOANS" based on blockchain technology. It uses the secure database capabilities of blockchain to provide quick property valuations for mortgage applicants in Hong Kong. Typically, when customers apply for mortgages, the bank hires surveyors to value the property being bought. But as different customers shop around for mortgages, the same survey work is often conducted multiple times on the same property. Now, blockchain technology is used to list the latest valuations that can be verified and shared in a matter of seconds. 

		4- "STOCK MARKET"
			For the final example, "Nasdaq Linq" enables an issuer to digitally represent a record of ownership. In addition, it reduces settlement time and eliminates the need for paper stock certificates. Issuers and investors can literally complete and execute subscription documents online. Settlement time can be reduced from the current market standard of three days to as little as 10 minutes. This adds the net effect of REDUCING SETTLEMENT RISK BY OVER 99%, DRAMATICALLY REDUCING CAPITAL COSTS AND SYSTEMIC RISK. Overall, THE ADMINISTRATION BURDEN DROPS CONSIDERABLY. All these qualities make Nasdaq Linq, powered by blockchain, compelling and disruptive. You can bet other stock markets will likely follow, too. While many of these examples represent the innovators and leaders, and they are in varying stages of experimentation and production, the conclusion is clear. Blockchain technology may have significant impact on the financial industry in remarkable ways in the months and years ahead.



	ALTCOINS, ALTCHAINS, AND ICOS
	
	ALTCOINS
	- It would be easy to conclude that Bitcoin is the only cryptocurrency available. Sure, it`s the only one I`ve discussed so far. In fact, there are many more cryptocurrencies, many that have forked from the original open source Bitcoin code and there are quite a few alternative blockchains. We call these altcoins and altchains, respectively. As of mid-July 2017, there are around 900 cryptocurrencies in circulation. Yes, 900. These include names such as Blackcoin, Dash, Gridcoin, Lightcoin, Peercoin, Ripple, and Zcash. Bitcoin is by far the largest and this is followed by Ethereum, Ripple, and Lightcoin. Because Bitcoin is open source anyone can create an altcoin including you and I. Why are people and organizations creating their own cryptocurrencies? Apart from the obvious allure of being someone who has created a new currency, there are four core motivations for the creator. 
	"Why are people and organizations creating their own cryptocurrencies?"
		1. Number one, there altcoin can have a different monetary policy. 
		2. Two, it can have a different proof of work or consensus mechanism. 
		3. Three, it can have specific features or focus areas such as NXT, which is for supporting and creating financial services applications. 
		4. And four, for using to issue an initial coin offering, or ICO. 
	
	ICOS
			Let`s look more deeply at that last one, an initial coin offering, an ICO. An ICO is a fundraising mechanism in which typically a start up can sell their underlying cryptocurrency in exchange for Bitcoin. It`s kind of similar to an initial public offering or IPO, in which investors can buy shares of a company. There are few restrictions on who can buy into an ICO. Since the start up is taking money from a global audience of investors the amount raised can be large. A risk with ICOs is that they are raising money pre-product. It makes the investment highly speculative. There is significant debate on whether and how ICOs should be regulated. The US securities and exchange commission, the SCC, who are responsible for such things, are engaged in the topic, particularly to determine whether the tokens offered in an ICO are considered a security. Until there are formal rulings ICOs will continue in the legal gaps that exist. Recently, China and South Korea have made ICOs illegal. This will be an important space to watch in the months and years ahead. Recent ICOs and upcoming ICOs can be found at "coinschedule.com", among other places. 
	
	ALTCHAINS
	"Bitcoin uses the blockchain to achieve DISTRIBUTED CONSENSUS on who owns what coins." The blockchain was invented specifically for the Bitcoin project, but a distributed ledger can be applied anywhere a distributed consensus needs to be established. As a result, alternative blockchains or altchains have emerged. At a basic level, altchains support altcoins, so we can consider them hand in hand. However, many altcoins do use the Bitcoin blockchain. Altchains do provide us with some opportunities. 
	"OPPORTUNITIES"
	1. Number one, they are perfect for experimentation. This supports "learning and testing". 
	2. Two, altchains can be "tuned for particular uses". For example, liquid is a sidechain, an altchain that is pegged to the Bitcoin blockchain and it`s designed to facilitate rapid transfers among a small number of Bitcoin exchanges and brokers. It avoids latencies of conducting transactions on the core Bitcoin blockchain. 
	3. Three, an altchain may be used to "exercise greater control over Bitcoin transactions". It could, for example, require proof that a wallet is owned by a verified institution before allowing it to receive funds. 
	4. And finally, four, an altchain can be used to "provide privacy" that goes above and beyond those inherent to Bitcoin. For example, transactions could be hidden from public view to prevent discovery of trade secrets. The exploration of altcoins, altchains, sidechains, and ICOs further expands upon the emerging universe of distributed ledger technology. It`s moving quickly and in some respects unpredictably. Not unusual for an emerging technology. Altchain, altcoins for example are being viewed by many as a failing enterprise with a belief that the rigor and trust of Bitcoin and Ethereum will likely dominate. Additionally, ICOs, which have shown so much promise for fundraising may not survive future regulation, or at best, might be constrained in their optimal potential. It won`t be long before there are even more derivations that we`ll need to consider, but we`ll know soon enough.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	QUIZ
	What does "trustless" mean?
		The system does not rely on trust.

	Why is proof of work required for bitcoin?
		The rigor of the process ensures greater transaction integrity.

	Which financial stakeholder benefit from distributed ledger technology?
		mortgage holders
		mortgage companies
		commercial stock traders

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------		
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. THE WIDER BLOCKCHAIN UNIVERSE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	BLOCKCHAIN IN PRACTICE: HYPERLEDGER AND RIPPLE
	- "RIPPLE AND HYPERLEDGER." 
	1. Ripple. 
		PROBLEM : Cross-border Payment
		Today when a person or organization uses a bank to send a cross-border payment to another entity, this transaction can take many days and incur significant fees. The global banking system has many intermediaries. I`ve personally sent money via my bank to other countries many times and it`s often taken over 10 days. That`s not great for the sender or the receiver, but that`s the way it is generally today. Additionally, because of a variety of fees and other overheads, sending very small payments cross border becomes restrictive. How might this be solved? 
		SOLUTION : 
		Ripple is a Blockchain enabled solution for banks that can reduce the time for sending payments from days to seconds. 
		How does it do this? 
			Each bank that participates in a Ripple fund transfer must be part of the Ripple network or interface with an intermediary that is. Just like being part of the Bitcoin network, every user of the Ripple network gets a copy of an identical Blockchain ledger. All transactions will be captured and managed in this Blockchain. But before we get too far, let`s use an example to make it easier. Alice in San Francisco wants to send Bob in London $1,000. Both Alice and Bob`s banks belong to the Ripple network. When Alice instructs her bank to spend $1,000, her bank uses the Ripple cryptocurrency called "XRP" which is similar to Bitcoin to send the XRP equivalent of $1,000 to Bob`s bank. The Ripple Blockchain uses consensus to permit the transaction and a new block is added to the Ripple Blockchain. This new block records that Alice`s bank sent $1,000 worth of XRP and Bob`s bank received $1,000 worth of XRP. "The transaction is trustless and immutable." Alice`s bank makes the adjustment to her account showing it has $1,000 less and Bob`s bank makes the adjustment that Bob`s account now has $1,000 more. For Alice and Bob, the transaction is complete and it appears it took just a few seconds. "HOWEVER, IN REALITY, NO MONEY HAS MOVED." Since a trustless and immutable transaction now exists in the Ripple Blockchain, both banks can settle the actual monetary transaction using any number of alternative but less immediate debt reconciliation processes. We can think of Ripple as a fancy IOU system. The difference is that it doesn`t rely on trust but rather the cryptocurrency and consensus based immutability features of a public distributed Blockchain ledger.

		2. HYPERLEDGER
			Up until now we`ve been discussing Blockchain or distributed ledger technology, DLT, that is open and public. Bitcoin and Ethereum for example allow anyone to join and for anyone to inspect the contents of blocks. In addition, their native design require cryptocurrency as the underlying digital signature transaction mechanism in order to function. What happens though if we want all the advantages of Blockchain technology but want to have a system that can manage private information that can support specific limited participants and doesn`t require its own cryptocurrency? 
			We`ll need an alternate enterprise class Blockchain. That`s the purpose of the Hyperledger project. It was created in 2015 by the Linux Foundation as a cross-industry collaboration involving technology companies such as "Cisco, VMware, IBM, and Intel," banks such as "JP Morgan and Wells Fargo", and other organizations such as "Accenture and Guardtime". 
			The object was to create Blockchain distributed ledgers capable of supporting Global business transactions by major technology, financial, and supply chain companies. One of the first releases was published as recent as July 2017 based on an existing code base from IBM called HYPERLEDGER FABRIC. It`s open source and designed to be Enterprise quality. Unlike many other public Blockchains, Hyperledger Fabric was designed to support private transactions, scalability, and a modular design that could be incorporate existing software solutions such as "IBM`S BLUEMIX", a cloud-based architecture for creating, deploying, and managing cloud applications.  
			Hyperledger Fabric also supports "SMART CONTRACTS" which they call "CHAINCODE". 
			You might be thinking how can this be a true blockchain if it doesn`t rely on the trustless qualities exhibited in Bitcoin and others like it. In Hyperledger Fabric, all the participants are known as opposed to anonymous. It`s called a "Permission system" and users and validators have specific roles. Identity management is executed through encryption and signing keys. It`s a creative way of leveraging the advantages of blockchain technology, but in an enterprise context. 


			Both Ripple and Hyperledger demonstrate the scope and evolving nature of distributed ledger technology. It`s also a technology supported by many of the leading companies in the world which means it has the financial backing and momentum of big industry. We may just be at the beginning of the blockchain revolution, but we can already see it`s going to be a really big deal.




	USING ETHEREUM TO WRITE SMART CONTRACTS
	- The emergence of blockchain owes its birth to Bitcoin. But while Bitcoin centrally focuses on sending and receiving digital currency, other solutions have emerged that use the blockchain beyond a pure payment system. One of the most popular is an open-source platform called Ethereum. It uses a cryptocurrency called ether to fund the execution of software code over a distributed peer-to-peer network. Ethereum was proposed in late 2013 by Vitalik Buterin, a cryptocurrency researcher and programmer. Unlike the allusive Satoshi Nakamoto of Bitcoin fame, Vitalik is very much real and known. Today, he continues to develop Ethereum with the Global open-source community. Ethereum`s peer-to-peer network is made up of participant computers collectively called the Ethereum Virtual Machine, or EVM. Just like Bitcoin, every computer has the complete blockchain installed. It`s trustless and uses consensus and miners to add blocks. When a new transaction is added, it gets added to every computer. That`s where the similarities largely end. Instead of currency as the end goal, Ethereum enables programmers using a proprietary language called Solidity to write code that is distributed across the EVM and executed under certain conditions. In blockchain parlance, we call this code smart contracts. 

	Smart contracts enable distributed applications known as "dapps". But why code on a blockchain? Most enterprise class applications rely on expensive and redundant architecture. Everything from identity management to storage must be provided and supported. In addition, several layers of code to ensure security, scalability, and logic create cost and performance overhead. For a developer, Ethereum provides the possibilities of a low-cost, massively scaled, and secure application platform right out of the virtual box. The EVM avoids censorship, downtime, since it can`t be turned off, fraud, and third-party interference. In particular, Ethereum applications can be trustless, not relying on the attendant challenges of governing authorities. The magic with Ethereum is that, when smart contracts are executed, there is a movement of cryptocurrency, in this case, ether that acts as a method of payment and authentication. Imagine writing an Ethereum application that enables a person to play a premium-based LinkedIn Learning training video. The code will be executed upon confirmation of ether payment. Because Ethereum uses the same cryptocurrency qualities as Bitcoin, it doesn`t require any additional authentication methods, payment gateways, account management, credit cards, or complex forms. In our example, when the smart contract conditions are met, LinkedIn gets paid, the person sees the video, and the transaction is immutably recorded and distributed to all computers on the Ethereum blockchain. 
	Developers pay to deploy a smart contract with units called "ether". 
	Compute time on the EVM requires units called "gas". Gas is a measure of the computational effort required to run some specific code. So, when a user runs the code within a smart contract, they must make sure it has enough gas, which is paid for with ether. 

	Finally, Ethereum miners add blocks to its distributed blockchain ledger, and get paid ether for winning the hashing problems necessary as "proof of work". On remarkable consequence of smart contracts is that they can technically live forever, executing any time conditions are met. Since the value of ether fluctuates, the cost of executing a smart contract can go up or down. In this way, a smart contract is more like a commodity. While we`re still in the early days of application development, there are a number of ideas being pursued, including 
			- a voting system called Horizon State, 
			- a predication market called Augur, 
			- a live broadcasting system called Livepeer, and 
			- a system for buying and selling event tickets called EventChain. 

		These few give us a sense of the diversity we can expect in the future. If you`re interested in programming smart contracts, you`ll need to use a JavaScript-like language called "SOLIDITY". 
		To get started, first download the "Mist browser". Mist is the front-end to running and using Ethereum applications. It`s available from many sources, so simply do a web search and download the latest version. 
		After installation, you`ll have the option to use a test environment or the main network. The test environment will let you use the Ethereum network and dapps without the need to purchase and use real ether. If you`re feeling confident, use the main network. You`ll get the option to buy real ether and, for that, you`ll need to own some Bitcoin. 
		In order to write and deploy dapps, you`ll need the Ethereum Wallet, which you can download from ethereum.org. 

		Since programming is outside the scope of this course, I suggest checking out Blockgeeks or Gitbooks There are plenty of other free guides online. Solidity remains a work in progress, so expect many changes ahead. Ethereum illustrates the enormous potential of blockchain technology. Rather than a technology limited to digital money, blockchain opens up a completely new way of thinking about developing, deploying, and executing software. While the future path for Ethereum and others is still somewhat unpredictable, the winners that emerge will be the creators of the next generation of the internet.



		QUIZ
		Ripple 	 - It uses a trustless model to ensure a future settlement.
		Ethereum - Dapps can be created with or without Ether.The Mist browser enables the creation of Dapps for testing without Ether.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------	
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. IMPLEMENTING BLOCKCHAIN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	THE ENERGY SECTOR AND BLOCKCHAIN
	- PROBLEM Most of us take energy for granted. We turn on a light and it works. It powers our homes and the economies of the world. Over the past century, low-cost electricity has powered the biggest improvements in quality of living to the most people in history. But this incredible transformation has taken a toll. We`ve dug deep holes to extract coal, oil, and natural gas providing us with a steady supply of energy and a planetary hangover. From climate change to poor air quality to ground pollution and disease and poisons in our rivers and oceans and more, we`ve paid a hefty price. Still, our appetite for energy is increasing. Fortunately, a mix of power efficiencies in our devices, the promises of renewables such as solar, wind, and thermal as well as safer nuclear options may create new opportunities that mix power abundance with lower cost and less impact to the planet. There is political and economic motivation to drive much more energy innovation. One of the most speculative areas is the role of blockchain technology in the energy sector. The energy sector like many others generates a high volume of transactions. There are a wide range of participants in any energy interaction. Consider energy generators, distributors, traders, regulators, and industrial end users as the core players. In the flow of energy from the generation source to the consumer, there are a myriad of these stakeholders, additionally billing and cash flow moves between independent participants.  It`s a complex ecosystem that requires extensive trust and intermediaries. 
	- SOLUTION
		1. At a basic level, blockchain technology seems well suited to "securely recording and storing transactions and thus increasing integrity and trust." 
		2. In addition, an energy blockchain could provide "secure storage of ownership records", in particular in the field of energy certification. 
			Here are three USE CASES. 
				1. First is the verification of renewable electricity and of emission allowances. 
				2. In the second case, a register that records and regulates the ownership and current state of assets such as smart meters, 	networks, and generation facilities. 	
				3. And the third, smart meter data could be shared with a wide variety of consumers without compromising privacy or security while 	also offering the opportunity to generate income from sharing. 

		3. The next area is in the "domain of energy billing". We`ll look at billing for Electric Vehicles or EVs. As more people buy EVs, we`ll eventually require an extensive network of perhaps millions of charging stations. When an EV parks say in a supermarket parking lot, it`s an opportunity for charging. While many payment systems exist, an efficient billing mechanism could be provided by the blockchain. As we explored in my blockchain basics course, the slock.it solution enables secure, efficient blockchain transactions between devices without needing intermediaries, for example opening a bicycle lock with a smartphone. In fact, a startup called Share&Charge allows anyone who owns an EV charger to become a provider. This could be an excellent bridge option as the EV charger network gets built or perhaps it is the shape of things to come. Traditionally, there are major energy producers who provide energy either carbon or non-carbon based directly to customers or through a distribution provider, but this model which hasn`t changed in decades has the potential for future disruption. In particular, when industries and homeowners begin to produce their own power using solar and wind for example, a marketplace where the consumer also becomes the producer is well within the realm of possibility in just a few years. The potential trading and interactions between players becomes very interesting indeed. Let`s assume that an entire sizable neighborhood of homeowners generates their own power. This neighborhood has microclimates so sometimes one side of the neighborhood is cloudy while the other side is sunny. When the cloudy side needs power and assuming the sunny side produces more than it needs, the excess power could be sold to the cloudy side. A great way to facilitate this will be to use a blockchain that uses smart contracts to manage the energy trades. Over time, homeowners would accumulate cryptocurrency that could be converted to say dollars or could be used to directly purchase products. Several companies are already developing and testing this technology. 
		Using a theorem technology, Grid Singularity supports many of these use cases. 
		Power Ledger is another cutting edge blockchain-based platform for energy trading. 
		Electron in the UK is building a platform for microgrid trading and also for smart grid data management. 
		Finally, SolarCoins are earned from homeowners who produce solar power. Authenticating the generation of power results in the collection of SolarCoins. The SolarCoin blockchain is a tradeable digital currency that can be converted into a local currency, or used directly with a variety of retailers. It`s a model for incentivizing solar power usage. SolarCoin gets its value from being the product of power generation which produces the proof of work. 

	IDENTITY MANAGEMENT AND BLOCKCHAIN
		- PROBLEMWhat makes blockchain technology so compelling is that it has broad disruptive applications. We`ve already seen many potential uses in several industries. One of the most exciting and promising opportunities is identify management. It`s an important societal, political, economic and computer science issue. But a foolproof method of proving one`s identity has been an elusive goal. Sure, systems require users to register their personal details, new credit and debit cards have embedded chips, and organizations use many other methods to try to authenticate identity. But there are few checks and balances that work to ensure 100% integrity. Governments have provided multiple mechanisms for identity management, from passports to identity cards. All have ultimately failed as forgery-proof methods, with the rare exception of Estonia which had the unique opportunity to build digital identity from the ground up when it became independent in 1991. The reality is a world replete with identity theft and fraud. In our digital world, the need for robust identity management has never been more urgent. If we can do it, we`d significantly reduce risk and open up many new opportunities for innovation. Might the blockchain offer that solution? 
		- SOLUTION 
@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ IDEA @@@@@@@@@@@@@@UNIQUE IDENTITY SYSTEM FOR COMPANY EMPLOYEES@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@
			A. uPort
			  The CITY OF ZUG IN SWITZERLAND has become the first to offer its citizens digital identity. They consider it a type of digital passport for variety of applications in the city. Eventually, they hope to use it for online voting. It`s not based on a lookup against essential database at city hall. Instead, identities are stored in the blockchain. In this instance, the system is based on Ethereum using a decentralized app called "uPort". According to its original creators` consensus, uPort is an opensource software project to establish a Global unified sovereign identity system for people, businesses, organizations, devices and bots. 
			  It`s made up of four components. 
			  1. First is a mobile application, essentially a mobile identity key. 
			  2. Second is a set of opensource developer libraries. These enable integrations of uPort with other decentralized apps & with traditional digital service providers. 
			  3. Third are smart contracts which are software code that runs on top of the blockchain. These uPort smart contracts include access control, account recovery, and storage of contacts. 
			  4. Finally, the fourth component are developer tools. These are technical and educational resources for easily integrating the uPort platform with the solution. 

			B.  Civic
				Another implementation is a product called Civic. Civic is an app that uses decentralized architecture with the blockchain and biometrics on the mobile device to prove identity. It doesn`t require a username, password, third-party authenticator, or physical hardware token. So how does it work? After a user downloads the app, she completes an identity validation process that is customized for a particular business use. Let`s say a business requires a driver`s license for authentication. The user scans the driver`s license, and it`s validated by Civic`s validation services. That information is hashed, and an immutable entry is made in the blockchain. The original personally-identifiable information can be deleted from the device and from Civic`s servers. When the user interacts with this business, it requires minimal information because the credentials have already been established and can be authenticated against the blockchain transaction. No private information is transmitted between the user and the business. As the Civic ecosystem of business providers grows, they can trust each other`s validation method, thus not requiring additional validation. For example, if the validation for the passport (mumbles) is accepted, the driver`s license authority may find that acceptable and not require additional validation. There are many players in this space. 
				Others include "Block Auth" that enables users to own and operate their own identity register. 
				There`s "Bitnation" which has created a blockchain-based solution for identity that includes a passport and a marriage certificate. 
				Finally, there is "Identifi" which has created a Global address book of trusted and secure entries. 

				Most of these are in the early stages of development, but pilots and prototypes look promising. If blockchain-based identity management takes off, it would enable a whole host of new capabilities. Most compelling is the promise of online voting. This can be thought of in the government context, but also for voting within organizations and for entertainment services. Online voting would lower the cost of voting, address voter fraud, and introduce the idea of voting more frequently as opposed to two or every four years, as is the case in many jurisdictions. 

				We`ll likely see blockchain based identity management across every sector of the economy. Imagine being able to securely access a person`s entire health record in a timely fashion to save a life, or simply check the age of a person buying alcohol. And it won`t just be humans doing this identity management. Machines will conducted via facial recognition and retina scanning. It would also be machine to machine. 
				Self-driving cars will need to interact and negotiate with a multitude of other devices such as other vehicles and EV charging stations. Every device could have a unique identity on the blockchain. I`m encouraged by what I see with blockchain-based identity management. System developers and designers need to seriously consider how to experiment with some of these solutions now.


		QUIZ
		1. How might blockchain technology impact energy providers?
		Everyone may have the potential to earn income from providing energy.

		2. Why is citizen identity management technology moving slowly in most countries?
		regulation
		cost
		culture
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. RISKS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
	THE RISKS OF BLOCKCHAIN
	- As an open-source project, Bitcoin is still evolving. As we`ve also discussed, alt-coins and alt-chains are forking from the original code and taking these technologies into new territory. The Ethereum network, barely over two years old, is still considered in development, although practical solutions already deployed. We have enough evidence and use cases that this is compelling and disruptive technology, but we must view it through the lens of speculation. There are risks for just about everyone participating, whether it`s banks incorporating blockchain cross-border transfer tools, experiments with buying and selling peer-to-peer solar-based energy, Solidity developers building smart contracts for the Ethereum platform, or the millions of cryptocurrency investors in bitcoin, ether, and alt-coins. There`s little settled in the blockchain space. That said, large participation and billions of dollars of investment are signals of something very real. In Blockchain Basics, we explored some of the risks in blockchain technology today. These risks included those to the financial services industry, of disrupted business models, and reduced revenue. We also looked at the risks of not exploring it, perhaps missing a first mover advantage. We discussed how many people are disengaged because blockchain technology is difficult to understand or they simply haven`t been educated on the basics, and finally we acknowledged that openness, a core quality of blockchain, can also be a liability. These issues persist and will continue to improve over time, but let`s explore some recent risk-based events that need to be addressed. 
	1. Bitcoin hacking
		There are several ways this can happen; we`ll look at two. 
		i. The first involves "public and private keys." We acknowledge that the public key is just that, public. It can be shared freely and poses no risk. However, a private key should only be known to the user. Your keys are typically stored in an online wallet but a private key can be stored anywhere, written down, or on cloud-based storage. If a hacker gains access to it, they have the keys to your kingdom. If you lose your private key, it`s game over. So protect it well. 
		ii. The second hack exploits" bitcoin miners." You`ll recall that bitcoin miners use increasing amounts of computing power to solve a predetermined hash. The first miner to solve the hash is rewarded with newly minted bitcoins. As time passes, the hash algorithm increases in complexity and requires more computing power, so it becomes less accessible to small players. There have been several successful attempts by hackers to commandeer a miner`s computing power to make the blockchain network believe the winning miner is the hacker. A variation of this hack is the deployment of malware that enables the hacker to use the processing power of private computers, perhaps yours, as part of a mining pool. Criminals have launched a variety of attacks against Bitcoin. As a cryptocurrency, bitcoin and many others are being traded. As a result, several cryptocurrencies have seen their values skyrocket. Criminals used a distributed denial of service attack to make several bitcoin exchanges unresponsive. By interrupted core exchanges, criminals are altering the dynamics in which trading is taking place. Done right, they use the DDOS attack to profit from the change in currency value. With so many participants now in the Bitcoin and alt-coin ecosystem, we see the emergence of a range of new providers, coin traders, providers for mining tools, and cryptocurrency escrow services. For many, it will be difficult to recognize legitimate services versus scams. Recent criminal activities have involved mining opportunities that amounted to nothing more than a Ponzi scheme. In the world of cryptocurrencies, scams abound. In Japan, there was an incident involving a bitcoin exchange called Mt. Gox. At one point, it handled 70% of all Global bitcoin transactions. In 2014, it suspended trading, closed its website, and filed for bankruptcy. They announced $450 million worth of bitcoin were missing. While some were recovered, the loss was attributed to theft directly from the Mt. Gox wallet. The case continues. Another incident was the first formal exploration of the distributed autonomous organization, or DAO. A DAO offers the disruptive notion of an organization without leadership, without hierarchy, and without a specific location or headquarters. As a blockchain-enabled organization, the DAO claimed to be completely transparent. Everything was done by the code, which anyone could see and audit. The DAO was intended to operate as a hub that disperses funds in ether to projects. By May 2016, the DAO had raised over $150 million from over 11,000 investers. In June 2016, users exploited a vulnerability in the DAO code that enabled them to siphon off one-third of the funds. Some efforts to recover the money were successful albeit controversial. The exploit was somewhat useful to learn from and thus evolved the Ethereum platform. We`ll need failures in order to improve the technology. In addition, the idea of a DAO will certainly continue and it`s one of the most stunning possible outcomes of distributed ledger technology. The biggest risk in the medium term is whether blockchain technology will continue to mature, whether confidence will remain high, and the ecosystem of participants continue to invest. In each of these areas, questions remain. From a technology perspective, we`re still in the early days. Performance and scalability are still limitations. Right now, the market is hot and there are billions of dollars of investment. It`s a good sign. We`ll want it to continue if blockchain is going to be the significant disrupter so many of us predict. Finally, with big risk, there are often big rewards. Those organizations that commit to learn about the technology, experiment with it, participate in the innovation, and are in the right place at the right time may realize a significant upside. Each organization and each leader will need to evaluate their appetite for risk.

		QUIZ
		Actually, blockchain technology is still developing. There have been notable hacks. In addition, anyone who has possession of a private key can access a person`s transactions.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONCLUSION
	NEXT STEPS
